 The CHORUS alight from their winged cars. Enter OCEANUS mounted on a
 griffin.

OCEANUS.
  Thus, over leagues and leagues of space
  I come, Prometheus, to thy place—
  By will alone, not rein, I guide
  The winged thing on which I ride;
  And much, be sure, I mourn thy case—
  Kinship is Pity’s bond, I trow;
  And, wert thou not akin, I vow
  None other should have more than thou
  Of my compassion’s grace!
  ’Tis said, and shall be proved; no skill
  Have I to gloze and feign goodwill!
  Name but some mode of helpfulness,
  And thou wilt in a trice confess
  That I, Oceanus, am best
  Of all thy friends, and trustiest.

PROMETHEUS.
  Ho, what a sight of marvel! what, thou too
  Comest to contemplate my pains, and darest—
  (Yet how, I wot not!) leaving far behind
  The circling tide, thy namefellow, and those
  Rock-arched, self-hollowed caverns—thus to come
  Unto this land, whose womb bears iron ore?
  Art come to see my lot, resent with me
  The ills I bear? Well, gaze thy fill! behold
  Me, friend of Zeus, part-author of his power—
  Mark, in what ruthlessness he bows me down!

OCEANUS.
  Yea, I behold, Prometheus! and would warn
  Thee, spite of all thy wisdom, for thy weal!
  Learn now thyself to know, and to renew
  A rightful spirit within thee, for, made new
  With pride of place, sits Zeus among the gods!
  Now, if thou choosest to fling forth on him
  Words rough with anger thus and edged with scorn,
  Zeus, though he sit aloof, afar, on high,
  May hear thine utterance, and make thee deem
  His present wrath a mere pretence of pain.
  Banish, poor wretch! the passion of thy soul,
  And seek, instead, acquittance from thy pangs!
  Belike my words seem ancientry to thee—
  Such, natheless, O Prometheus, is the meed
  That doth await the overweening tongue!
  Meek wert thou never, wilt not crouch to pain,
  But, set amid misfortunes, cravest more!
  Now—if thou let thyself be schooled by me—
  Thou must not kick against the goad. Thou knowest,
  A despot rules, harsh, resolute, supreme,
  Whose law is will. Yet shall I go to him,
  With all endeavour to relieve thy plight—
  So thou wilt curb the tempest of thy tongue!
  Surely thou knowest, in thy wisdom deep,
  The saw—_Who vaunts amiss, quick pain is his_.

PROMETHEUS.
  O enviable thou, and unaccused—
  Thou who wast art and part in all I dared!
  And now, let be! make this no care of thine,
  For Zeus is past persuasion—urge him not!
  Look to thyself, lest thine emprise thou rue.

OCEANUS.
  Thou hast more skill to school thy neighbour’s fault
  Than to amend thine own: ’tis proved and plain,
  By fact, not hearsay, that I read this well.
  Yet am I fixed to go—withhold me not—
  Assured I am, assured, that Zeus will grant
  The boon I crave, the loosening of thy bonds.

PROMETHEUS.
  In part I praise thee, to the end will praise;
  Goodwill thou lackest not, but yet forbear
  Thy further trouble! If thy heart be fain,
  Bethink thee that thy toil avails me not.
  Nay, rest thee well, aloof from danger’s brink!
  I will not ease my woe by base relief
  In knowing others too involved therein.
  Away the thought! for deeply do I rue
  My brother Atlas’ doom. Far off he stands
  In sunset land, and on his shoulder bears
  The pillar’d mountain-mass whose base is earth,
  Whose top is heaven, and its ponderous load
  Too great for any grasp. With pity too
  I saw Earth’s child, the monstrous thing of war,
  That in Cilicia’s hollow places dwelt—
  Typho; I saw his hundred-headed form
  Crushed and constrained; yet once his stride was fierce,
  His jaws gaped horror and their hiss was death,
  And all heaven’s host he challenged to the fray,
  While, as one vowed to storm the power of Zeus,
  Forth from his eyes he shot a demon glare.
  It skilled not: the unsleeping bolt of Zeus,
  The downward levin with its rush of flame,
  Smote on him, and made dumb for evermore
  The clamour of his vaunting: to the heart
  Stricken he lay, and all that mould of strength
  Sank thunder-shattered to a smouldering ash;
  And helpless now and laid in ruin huge
  He lieth by the narrow strait of sea,
  Crushed at the root of Etna’s mountain-pile.
  High on the pinnacles whereof there sits
  Hephaestus, sweltering at the forge; and thence
  On some hereafter day shall burst and stream
  The lava-floods, that shall with ravening fangs
  Gnaw thy smooth lowlands, fertile Sicily!
  Such ire shall Typho from his living grave
  Send seething up, such jets of fiery surge,
  Hot and unslaked, altho’ himself be laid
  In quaking ashes by Zeus’ thunderbolt.
  But thou dost know hereof, nor needest me
  To school thy sense: thou knowest safety’s road—
  Walk then thereon! I to the dregs will drain,
  Till Zeus relent from wrath, my present woe.

OCEANUS.
  Nay, but, Prometheus, know’st thou not the saw—
  _Words can appease the angry soul’s disease?_

PROMETHEUS.
  Ay—if in season one apply their salve,
  Not scorching wrath’s proud flesh with caustic tongue.

OCEANUS.
  But in wise thought and venturous essay
  Perceivest thou a danger? prithee tell!

PROMETHEUS.
  I see a fool’s good nature, useless toil.

OCEANUS.
  Let me be sick of that disease; I know,
  Loyalty, masked as folly, wins the way.

PROMETHEUS.
 But of thy blunder I shall bear the blame.

OCEANUS.
  Clearly, thy word would send me home again.

PROMETHEUS.
  Lest thy lament for me should bring thee hate.

OCEANUS.
  Hate from the newly-throned Omnipotence?

PROMETHEUS.
  Be heedful—lest his will be wroth with thee!

OCEANUS.
  Thy doom, Prometheus, cries to me _Beware!_

PROMETHEUS.
  Mount, make away, discretion at thy side!

OCEANUS.
  Thy word is said to me in act to go:
  For lo, my hippogriff with waving wings
  Fans the smooth course of air, and fain is he
  To rest his limbs within his ocean stall.

 [_Exit OCEANUS._]

CHORUS.
For the woe and the wreck and the doom, Prometheus I utter my sighs;
O’er my cheek flows the fountain of tears from tender, compassionate
eyes.
For stern and abhorred is the sway of Zeus on his self-sought throne,
And ruthless the spear of his scorn, to the gods of the days that are
done.
And over the limitless earth goes up a disconsolate cry:
_Ye were all so fair, and have fallen; so great and your might has gone
by!_
So wails with a mighty lament the voice of the mortals, who dwell
In the Eastland, the home of the holy, for thee and the fate that
befel;
And they of the Colchian land, the maidens whose arm is for war;
And the Scythian bowmen, who roam by the lake of Maeotis afar;
And the blossom of battling hordes, that flowers upon Caucasus’ height,
With clashing of lances that pierce, and with clamour of swords that
smite.
Strange is thy sorrow! one only I know who has suffered thy pain—
Atlas the Titan, the god, in a ruthless, invincible chain!
He beareth for ever and ever the burden and poise of the sky,
The vault of the rolling heaven, and earth re-echoes his cry.
The depths of the sea are troubled; they mourn from their caverns
profound,
And the darkest and innermost hell moans deep with a sorrowful sound;
And the rivers of waters, that flow from the fountains that spring
without stain,
Are as one in the great lamentation, and moan for thy piteous pain.

PROMETHEUS.
  Deem not that I in pride or wilful scorn
  Restrain my speech; ’tis wistful memory
  That rends my heart, when I behold myself
  Abased to wretchedness. To these new gods
  I and none other gave their lots of power
  In full attainment; no more words hereof
  I speak—the tale ye know. But listen now
  Unto the rede of mortals and their woes,
  And how their childish and unreasoning state
  Was changed by me to consciousness and thought.
  Yet not in blame of mortals will I speak,
  But as in proof of service wrought to them.
  For, in the outset, eyes they had and saw not;
  And ears they had but heard not; age on age,
  Like unsubstantial shapes in vision seen,
  They groped at random in the world of sense,
  Nor knew to link their building, brick with brick,
  Nor how to turn its aspect to the sun,
  Nor how to join the beams by carpentry,
  In hollowed caves they dwelt, as emmets dwell,
  Weak feathers for each blast, in sunless caves.
  Nor had they certain forecast of the cold,
  Nor of the advent of the flowery spring,
  Nor of the fruitful summer. All they wrought,
  Unreasoning they wrought, till I made clear
  The laws of rising stars, and inference dim,
  More hard to learn, of what their setting showed.
  I taught to them withal that art of arts,
  The lore of number, and the written word
  That giveth sense to sound, the tool wherewith
  The gift of memory was wrought in all,
  And so came art and song. I too was first
  To harness ’neath the yoke strong animals,
  Obedient made to collar and to weight,
  That they might bear whate’er of heaviest toil
  Mortals endured before. For chariots too
  I trained, and docile service of the rein,
  Steeds, the delight of wealth and pomp and pride.
  I too, none other, for seafarers wrought
  Their ocean-roaming canvas-wingèd cars.
  Such arts of craft did I, unhappy I,
  Contrive for mortals: now, no feint I have
  Whereby I may elude my present woe.

CHORUS.
  A rueful doom is thine! distraught of soul,
  And all astray, and like some sorry leech
  Art thou, repining at thine own disease,
  Unskilled, unknowing of the needful cure.

PROMETHEUS.
  More wilt thou wonder when the rest thou hearest—
  What arts for them, what methods I devised.
  Foremost was this: if any man fell sick,
  No aiding art he knew, no saving food,
  No curing oil nor draught, but all in lack
  Of remedies they dwindled, till I taught
  The medicinal blending of soft drugs,
  Whereby they ward each sickness from their side.
  I ranged for them the methods manifold
  Of the diviner’s art; I first discerned
  Which of night’s visions hold a truth for day,
  I read for them the lore of mystic sounds,
  Inscrutable before; the omens seen
  Which bless or ban a journey, and the flight
  Of crook-clawed birds, did I make clear to man—
  And how they soar upon the right, for weal,
  How, on the left, for evil; how they dwell,
  Each in its kind, and what their loves and hates,
  And which can flock and roost in harmony.
  From me, men learned what deep significance
  Lay in the smoothness of the entrails set
  For sacrifice, and which, of various hues,
  Showed them a gift accepted of the gods;
  They learned what streaked and varied comeliness
  Of gall and liver told; I led them, too,
  (By passing thro’ the flame the thigh-bones, wrapt
  In rolls of fat, and th’ undivided chine),
  Unto the mystic and perplexing lore
  Of omens; and I cleared unto their eyes
  The forecasts, dim and indistinct before,
  Shown in the flickering aspect of a flame.
  Of these, enough is said. The other boons,
  Stored in the womb of earth, in aid of men—
  Copper and iron, silver, gold withal—
  Who dares affirm he found them ere I found?
  None—well I know—save who would babble lies!
  Know thou, in compass of a single phrase—
  All arts, for mortals’ use, Prometheus gave.

CHORUS.
  Nay, aid not mortal men beyond their due,
  Holding too light a reckoning of thyself
  And of thine own distress: good hope have I
  To see thee once again from fetters free
  And matched with Zeus in parity of power.

PROMETHEUS.
  Not yet nor thus hath Fate ordained the end—
  Not until age-long pains and countless woes
  Have bent and bowed me, shall my shackles fall;
  Art strives too feebly against destiny.

CHORUS.
  But what hand rules the helm of destiny?

PROMETHEUS.
  The triform Fates, and Furies unforgiving.

CHORUS.
  Then is the power of Zeus more weak than theirs?

PROMETHEUS.
  He may not shun the fate ordained for him.

CHORUS.
  What is ordained for him, save endless rule?

PROMETHEUS.
  Seek not for answer: this thou may’st not learn.

CHORUS.
  Surely thy silence hides some solemn thing.

PROMETHEUS.
  Think on some other theme: ’tis not the hour,
  This secret to unveil; in deepest dark
  Be it concealed: by guarding it shall I
  Escape at last from bonds, and scorn, and pain.

CHORUS.
  O never may my weak and faint desire
      Strive against God most high—
  Never be slack in service, never tire
      Of sacred loyalty;
  Nor fail to wend unto the altar-side,
      Where with the blood of kine
  Steams up the offering, by the quenchless tide
      Of Ocean, Sire divine!
  Be this within my heart, indelible—
      _Offend not with thy tongue!_
  Sweet, sweet it is, in cheering hopes to dwell,
      Immortal, ever young,
  In maiden gladness fostering evermore
      A soft content of soul!
  But ah, I shudder at thine anguish sore—
      Thy doom thro’ years that roll!
  Thou could’st not cower to Zeus: a love too great
      Thou unto man hast given—
  Too high of heart thou wert—ah, thankless fate!
      What aid, ’gainst wrath of Heaven,
  Could mortal man afford? in vain thy gift
      To things so powerless!
  Could’st thou not see? they are as dreams that drift;
      Their strength is feebleness
  A purblind race, in hopeless fetters bound,
      They have no craft or skill,
  That could o’erreach the ordinance profound
      of the eternal will.
  Alas, Prometheus! on thy woe condign
      I looked, and learned this lore;
  And a new strain floats to these lips of mine—
      Not the glad song of yore,
  When by the lustral wave I sang to see
      My sister made thy bride,
  Decked with thy gifts, thy loved Hesione,
      And clasped unto thy side.
