HERMES.
  So, I shall speak, whate’er I speak, in vain!
  No prayer can melt or soften thy resolve;
  But, as a colt new-harnessed champs the bit,
  Thou strivest and art restive to the rein.
  But all too feeble is the stratagem
  In which thou art so confident: for know
  That strong self-will is weak and less than nought
  In one more proud than wise. Bethink thee now—
  If these my words thou shouldest disregard—
  What storm, what might as of a great third wave
  Shall dash thy doom upon thee, past escape!
  First shall the Sire, with thunder and the flame
  Of lightning, rend the crags of this ravine,
  And in the shattered mass o’erwhelm thy form,
  Immured and morticed in a clasping rock.
  Thence, after age on age of durance done,
  Back to the daylight shall thou come, and there
  The eagle-hound of Zeus, red-ravening, fell
  With greed, shall tatter piecemeal all thy flesh
  To shreds and ragged vestiges of form—
  Yea, an unbidden guest, a day-long bane,
  That feeds, and feeds—yea, he shall gorge his fill
  On blackened fragments, from thy vitals gnawed.
  Look for no respite from that agony
  Until some other deity be found,
  Ready to bear for thee the brunt of doom,
  Choosing to pass into the lampless world
  Of Hades and the murky depths of hell.
  Hereat, advise thee! ’tis no feigned threat
  Whereof I warn thee, but an o’er-true tale.
  The lips of Zeus know nought of lying speech,
  But wreak in action all their words foretell.
  Therefore do thou look warily, and deem
  Prudence a better saviour than self-will.

CHORUS.
  Meseems that Hermes speaketh not amiss,
  Bidding thee leave thy wilfulness and seek
  The wary walking of a counselled mind.
  Give heed! to err through anger shames the wise.

PROMETHEUS.
  All, all I knew, whate’er his tongue
  In idle arrogance hath flung.
  ’Tis the world’s way, the common lot—
  Foe tortures foe and pities not.
  Therefore I challenge him to dash
  His bolt on me, his zigzag flash
    Of piercing, rending flame!
  Now be the welkin stirred amain
  With thunder-peal and hurricane,
  And let the wild winds now displace
  From its firm poise and rooted base
    The stubborn earthly frame!
  The raging sea with stormy surge
  Rise up and ravin and submerge
    Each high star-trodden way!
  Me let him lift and dash to gloom
  Of nether hell, in whirls of doom!
  Yet—do he what extremes he may—
  He cannot crush my life away!

HERMES.
  Such are the counsels, such the strain,
  Heard from wild lips and frenzied brain!
  In word or thought, how fails his fate
  Of madness wild and desperate?
                                          (_To the_ CHORUS)
  But ye, who stand compassionate
  Here at his side, depart in haste!
  Lest of his penalty ye taste,
  And shattered brain and reason feel
  The roaring, ruthless thunder-peal!

CHORUS.
  Out on thee! if thy heart be fain
  I should obey thee, change thy strain!
  Vile is thine hinted cowardice,
  And loathed of me thy base advice,
    Weakly to shrink from pain!
  Nay, at his side, whate’er befall,
  I will abide, endure it all!
  Among all things abhorr’d, accurst,
  I hold betrayers for the worst!

HERMES.
  Nay, ye are warned! remember well—
  Nor cry, when meshed in nets of hell,
  _Ah cruel fate, ah Zeus unkind—
  Thus, by a sentence undivined,
  To dash us to the realms below!_
  It is no sudden, secret blow—
  Nay, ye achieve your proper woe—
  Warn’d and foreknowing shall ye go,
  Through your own folly trapped and ta’en,
  Into the net the Fates ordain—
  The vast, illimitable pain!

 [_Thunder and lightning._]

PROMETHEUS.
  Hark! for no more in empty word,
  But in sheer sooth, the world is stirred!
  The massy earth doth heave and sway,
  And thro’ their dark and secret way
    The cavern’d thunders boom!
  See, how they gleam athwart the sky,
    The lightnings, through the gloom!
  And whirlwinds roll the dust on high,
  And right and left the storm-clouds leap
  To battle in the skyey deep,
  In wildest uproar unconfined,
  An universe of warring wind!
  And falling sky and heaving sea
  Are blent in one! on me, on me,
  Nearer and ever yet more near,
  Flaunting its pageantry of fear,
  Drives down in might its destined road
  The tempest of the wrath of God!
  O holy Earth, O mother mine!
  O Sky, that biddest speed along
  Thy vault the common Light divine,—
    Be witness of my wrong!

 [_The rocks are rent with fire and earthquake, and fall, burying
 PROMETHEUS in the ruins._]