 Enter the CHORUS OF OCEANIDES in winged cars.

CHORUS.
  Ah, fear us not! as friends, with rivalry
  Of swiftly-vying wings, we came together
  Unto this rock and thee!
  With our sea-sire we pleaded hard, until
  We won him to our will,
  And swift the wafting breezes bore us hither.
  The heavy hammer’s steely blow
  Thrilled to our ocean-cavern from afar,
  Banished soft shyness from our maiden brow,
  And with unsandalled feet we come, in winged car!

PROMETHEUS.
  Ah well-a-day! ye come, ye come
  From the Sea-Mother’s teeming home—
  Children of Tethys and the sire
  Who around Earth rolls, gyre on gyre,
  His sleepless ocean-tide!
  Look on me—shackled with what chain,
  Upon this chasm’s beetling side
  I must my dismal watch sustain!

CHORUS.
  Yea, I behold, Prometheus! and my fears
  Draw swiftly o’er mine eyes a mist fulfilled of tears,
  When I behold thy frame
  Bound, wasting on the rock, and put to shame
  By adamantine chains!
  The rudder and the rule of Heaven
  Are to strange pilots given:
  Zeus with new laws and strong caprice holds sway,
  Unkings  the ancient Powers, their might constrains,
  And thrusts their pride away!

PROMETHEUS.
  Had he but hurled me, far beneath
  The vast and ghostly halls of Death,
  Down to the limitless profound
  Of Tartarus, in fetters bound,
  Fixed by his unrelenting hand!
  So had no man, nor God on high,
  Exulted o’er mine agony—
  But now, a sport to wind and sky,
  Mocked by my foes, I stand!

CHORUS.
  What God can wear such ruthless heart
  As to delight in ill?
  Who in thy sorrow bears not part?
  Zeus, Zeus alone! for he, with wrathful will,
  Clenched and inflexible,
  Bears down Heaven’s race—nor end shall be, till hate
  His soul shall satiate,
  Or till, by some device, some other hand
  Shall wrest from him his sternly-clasped command!

PROMETHEUS.
  Yet,—though in shackles close and strong
  I lie in wasting torments long,—
  Yet the new tyrant, ’neath whose nod
  Cowers down each blest subservient god,
  One day, far hence, my help shall need,
  The destined stratagem to read,
  Whereby, in some yet distant day,
  Zeus shall be reaved of pride and sway:
  And no persuasion’s honied spell
  Shall lure me on, the tale to tell;
  And no stern threat shall make me cower
  And yield the secret to his power,
  Until his purpose be foregone,
  And shackles yield, and he atone
  The deep despite that he hath done!

CHORUS.
  O strong in hardihood, thou striv’st amain
  Against the stress of pain!
  But yet too free, too resolute thy tongue
  In challenging thy wrong!
  Ah, shuddering dread doth make my spirit quiver,
  And o’er thy fate sits Fear!
  I see not to what shore of safety ever
  Thy bark can steer—
  In depths unreached the will of Zeus doth dwell,
  Hidden, implacable!

PROMETHEUS.
  Ay, stern is Zeus, and Justice stands,
  Wrenched to his purpose, in his hands—
  Yet shall he learn, perforce, to know
  A milder mood, when falls the blow—
  His ruthless wrath he shall lay still,
  And he and I with mutual will
  In concord’s bond shall go.

CHORUS.
  Unveil, say forth to us the tale entire,
  Under what imputation Zeus laid hands
  On thee, to rack thee thus with shameful pangs?
  Tell us—unless the telling pain thee—all!

PROMETHEUS.
  Grievous alike are these things for my tongue,
  Grievous for silence—rueful everyway.
  Know that, when first the gods  began  their strife,
  And heaven was all astir with mutual feud—
  Some willing to fling Cronos from his throne,
  And set, forsooth, their Zeus on high as king,
  And other some in contrariety
  Striving to bar him from heaven’s throne for aye—
  Thereon I sought to counsel for the best
  The Titan brood of Ouranos and Earth;
  Yet I prevailed not, for they held in scorn
  My glozing wiles, and, in their hardy pride,
  Deemed that sans effort they could grasp the sway.
  But, for my sake, my mother Themis oft,
  And Earth, one symbol of names manifold,
  Had held me warned, how in futurity
  It stood ordained that not by force or power,
  But by some wile, the victors must prevail.
  In such wise I interpreted; but they
  Deigned not to cast their heed thereon at all.
  Then, of things possible, I deemed it best,
  Joining my mother’s wisdom to mine own,
  To range myself with Zeus, two wills in one.
  Thus, by device of mine, the murky depth
  Of Tartarus enfoldeth Cronos old
  And those who strove beside him. Such the aid
  I gave the lord of heaven—my meed for which
  He paid me thus, a penal recompense!
  For ’tis the inward vice of tyranny,
  To deem of friends as being secret foes.
  Now, to your question—hear me clearly show
  On what imputed fault he tortures me.
  Scarce was he seated on his father’s throne,
  When he began his doles of privilege
  Among the lesser gods, allotting power
  In trim division; while of mortal men
  Nothing he recked, nor of their misery
  Nay, even willed to blast their race entire
  To nothingness, and breed another brood;
  And none but I was found to cross his will.
  I dared it, I alone; I rescued men
  From crushing ruin and th’ abyss of hell—
  Therefore am I constrained in chastisement
  Grievous to bear and piteous to behold,—
  Yea, firm to feel compassion for mankind,
  Myself was held unworthy of the same—
  Ay, beyond pity am I ranged and ruled
  To sufferance—a sight that shames his sway!

CHORUS.
  A heart of steel, a mould of stone were he,
  Who could complacently behold thy pains
  I came not here as craving for this sight,
  And, seeing it, I stand heart-wrung with pain.

PROMETHEUS.
  Yea truly, kindly eyes must pity me!

CHORUS.
  Say, didst thou push transgression further still?

PROMETHEUS.
  Ay, man thro’ me ceased to foreknow his death.

CHORUS.
  What cure couldst thou discover for this curse?

PROMETHEUS.
  Blind hopes I sent to nestle in man’s heart.

CHORUS.
  This was a goodly gift thou gavest them.

PROMETHEUS.
  Yet more I gave them, even the boon of fire.

CHORUS.
  What? radiant fire, to things ephemeral?

PROMETHEUS.
  Yea—many an art too shall they learn thereby!

CHORUS.
  Then, upon imputation of such guilt,
  Doth Zeus without surcease torment thee thus?
  Is there no limit to thy course of pain?

PROMETHEUS.
  None, till his own will shall decree an end.

CHORUS.
  And how shall he decree it? say, what hope?
  Seëst thou not thy sin? yet of that sin
  It irks me sore to speak, as thee to hear.
  Nay, no more words hereof; bethink thee now,
  From this ordeal how to find release.

PROMETHEUS.
  Easy it is, for one whose foot is set
  Outside the slough of pain, to lesson well
  With admonitions him who lies therein.
  With perfect knowledge did I all I did,
  I willed to sin, and sinned, I own it all—
  I championed men, unto my proper pain.
  Yet scarce I deemed that, in such cruel doom,
  Withering upon this skyey precipice,
  I should inherit lonely mountain crags,
  Here, in a vast tin-neighboured solitude.
  Yet list not to lament my present pains,
  But, stepping from your cars unto the ground,
  Listen, the while I tell the future fates
  Now drawing near, until ye know the whole.
  Grant ye, O grant my prayer, be pitiful
  To one now racked with woe! the doom of pain
  Wanders, but settles, soon or late, on all.

CHORUS.
  To willing hearts, and schooled to feel,
  Prometheus, came thy tongue’s appeal;
  Therefore we leave, with lightsome tread,
  The flying cars in which we sped—
  We leave the stainless virgin air
  Where winged creatures float and fare,
  And by thy side, on rocky land,
  Thus gently we alight and stand,
  Willing, from end to end, to know
  Thine history of woe.
