_Scene—A rocky ravine in the mountains of Scythia_.


STRENGTH.
  Lo, the earth’s bound and limitary land,
  The Scythian steppe, the waste untrod of men!
  Look to it now, Hephaestus—thine it is,
  Thy Sire obeying, this arch-thief to clench
  Against the steep-down precipice of rock,
  With stubborn links of adamantine chain.
  Look thou: thy flower, the gleaming plastic fire,
  He stole and lent to mortal man—a sin
  That gods immortal make him rue to-day,
  Lessoned hereby to own th’ omnipotence
  Of Zeus, and to repent his love to man!

HEPHAESTUS.
  O Strength and Force, for you the best of Zeus
  Stands all achieved, and nothing bars your will:
  But I—I dare not bind to storm-vext cleft
  One of our race, immortal as are we.
  Yet, none the less, necessity constrains,
  For Zeus, defied, is heavy in revenge!
                                            (_To PROMETHEUS_)

  O deep-devising child of Themis sage,
  Small will have I to do, or thou to bear,
  What yet we must. Beyond the haunt of man
  Unto this rock, with fetters grimly forged,
  I must transfix and shackle up thy limbs,
  Where thou shalt mark no voice nor human form,
  But, parching in the glow and glare of sun,
  Thy body’s flower shall suffer a sky-change;
  And gladly wilt thou hail the hour when Night
  Shall in her starry robe invest the day,
  Or when the Sun shall melt the morning rime.
  But, day or night, for ever shall the load
  Of wasting agony, that may not pass,
  Wear thee away; for know, the womb of Time
  Hath not conceived a power to set thee free.
  Such meed thou hast, for love toward mankind
  For thou, a god defying wrath of gods,
  Beyond the ordinance didst champion men,
  And for reward shalt keep a sleepless watch,
  Stiff-kneed, erect, nailed to this dismal rock,
  With manifold laments and useless cries
  Against the will inexorable of Zeus.
  Hard is the heart of fresh-usurpèd power!

STRENGTH.
  Enough of useless ruth! why tarriest thou?
  Why pitiest one whom all gods wholly hate,
  One who to man gave o’er thy privilege?

HEPHAESTUS.
  Kinship and friendship wring my heart for him.

STRENGTH.
  Ay—but how disregard our Sire’s command?
  Is not thy pity weaker than thy fear?

HEPHAESTUS.
  Ruthless as ever, brutal to the full!

STRENGTH.
  Tears can avail him nothing: strive not thou,
  Nor waste thine efforts thus unaidingly.

HEPHAESTUS.
  Out on my cursed mastery of steel!

STRENGTH.
  Why curse it thus? In sooth that craft of thine
  Standeth assoiled of all that here is wrought.

HEPHAESTUS.
  Would that some other were endowed therewith!

STRENGTH.
  All hath its burden, save the rule of Heaven,
  And freedom is for Zeus, and Zeus alone.

HEPHAESTUS.
  I know it; I gainsay no word hereof.

STRENGTH.
  Up, then, and hasten to do on his bonds,
  Lest Zeus behold thee indolent of will!

HEPHAESTUS.
  Ah well—behold the armlets ready now!

STRENGTH.
  Then cast them round his arms and with sheer strength
  Swing down the hammer, clinch him to the crags.

HEPHAESTUS.
  Lo, ’tis toward—no weakness in the work!

STRENGTH.
  Smite harder, wedge it home—no faltering here!
  He hath a craft can pass th’ impassable!

HEPHAESTUS.
  This arm is fast, inextricably bound.

STRENGTH.
  Then shackle safe the other, that he know
  His utmost craft is weaker far than Zeus.

HEPHAESTUS.
  He, but none other, can accuse mine art!

STRENGTH.
  Now, strong and sheer, drive thro’ from breast to back
  The adamantine wedge’s stubborn fang.

HEPHAESTUS.
  Alas, Prometheus!  I lament thy pain.

STRENGTH.
  Thou, faltering and weeping sore for those
  Whom Zeus abhors! ’ware, lest thou rue thy tears!

HEPHAESTUS.
  Thou gazest on a scene that poisons sight.

STRENGTH.
  I gaze on one who suffers his desert.
  Now between rib and shoulder shackle him—

HEPHAESTUS.
  Do it I must—hush thy superfluous charge!

STRENGTH.
  Urge thee I will—ay, hound thee to the prey.
  Step downward now, enring his legs amain!

HEPHAESTUS.
  Lo, it is done—’twas but a moment’s toil.

STRENGTH.
  Now, strongly strike, drive in the piercing gyves—
  Stern is the power that oversees thy task!

HEPHAESTUS.
  Brutish thy form, thy speech brutality!

STRENGTH.
  Be gentle, an thou wilt, but blame not me
   For this my stubbornness and anger fell!

HEPHAESTUS.
  Let us go hence; his legs are firmly chained.

STRENGTH (_To_ PROMETHEUS).
Aha!  there play the insolent, and steal,
For creatures of a day, the rights of gods!
O deep delusion of the powers that named thee
Prometheus, the Fore-thinker! thou hast need
Of others’ forethought and device, whereby
Thou may’st elude this handicraft of ours!

[_Exeunt HEPHAESTUS, STRENGTH and FORCE.—A pause._]

PROMETHEUS.
  O Sky divine, O Winds of pinions swift,
  O fountain-heads of Rivers, and O thou,
  Illimitable laughter of the Sea!
  O Earth, the Mighty Mother, and thou Sun,
  Whose orbed light surveyeth all—attest,
  What ills I suffer from the gods, a god!
  Behold me, who must here sustain
  The marring agonies of pain,
  Wrestling with torture, doomed to bear
  Eternal ages, year on year!
  Such and so shameful is the chain
  Which Heaven’s new tyrant doth ordain
  To bind me helpless here.
  Woe! for the ruthless present doom!
  Woe! for the Future’s teeming womb!
  On what far dawn, in what dim skies,
  Shall star of my deliverance rise?

  Truce to this utterance!  to its dimmest verge
  I do foreknow the future, hour by hour,
  Nor can whatever pang may smite me now
  Smite with surprise. The destiny ordained
  I must endure to the best, for well I wot
  That none may challenge with Necessity.
  Yet is it past my patience, to reveal,
  Or to conceal, these issues of my doom.
  Since I to mortals brought prerogatives,
  Unto this durance dismal am I bound:
  Yea, I am he who in a fennel-stalk,
  By stealthy sleight, purveyed the fount of fire,
  The teacher, proven thus, and arch-resource
  Of every art that aideth mortal men.
  Such was my sin:  I earn its recompense,
  Rock-riveted, and chained in height and cold.

 [_A pause._]


  Listen! what breath of sound,
  what fragrance soft hath risen
  Upward to me? is it some godlike essence,
  Or being half-divine, or mortal presence?
  Who to the world’s end comes, unto my craggy prison?
  Craves he the sight of pain, or what would he behold?
  Gaze on a god in tortures manifold,
  Heinous to Zeus, and scorned by all
  Whose footsteps tread the heavenly hall,
  Because too deeply, from on high,
  I pitied man’s mortality!
  Hark, and again! that fluttering sound
  Of wings that whirr and circle round,
  And their light rustle thrills the air—
  How all things that unseen draw near
  Are to me Fear!
